src/pages/articles/aws-terraform-static-website.mdx, before:

import { ArticleLayout } from "@/components/ArticleLayout";

export const meta = {
  author: "Anton Ždanov",
  date: "2023-04-18T07:02:24.190Z",
  title: "How to host a static website on AWS S3, CloudFront and Route53 using Terraform",
  description:
    "A recipe on hosting a static website on AWS S3, CloudFront and Route53 using Terraform. Including a GitHub repository source code.",
};

export default (props) => <ArticleLayout meta={meta} {...props} />;

In this article, I'd like to share my experience of hosting a static website on AWS S3, CloudFront and Route53 using Terraform.
It will use a custom domain name, and it will be secured with a TLS certificate.

## Prerequisites

### AWS Account

You'll need an AWS account to host your website. If you don't have one, you can create one for free.

* [Create an AWS account](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/create-and-activate-aws-account/)
* [Getting started: Are you a first-time AWS user?](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/accounts/latest/reference/welcome-first-time-user.html)
* [Getting Started: Follow Security Best Practices as You Configure Your AWS Resources](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/security/getting-started-follow-security-best-practices-as-you-configure-your-aws-resources/)
* [Avoiding unexpected charges](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/awsaccountbilling/latest/aboutv2/checklistforunwantedcharges.html)
* [What is the AWS Free Tier, and how do I use it?](https://repost.aws/knowledge-center/what-is-free-tier)

Just to reiterate, you should follow the best practices when working with AWS:

1. Create a separate [IAM user](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_users_create.html) and don't use the root account.
2. [Enable MFA](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_credentials_mfa_enable.html#id_credentials_mfa_enable-overview) for both the root account and the IAM user (or even better [use SSO](https://aws.amazon.com/iam/identity-center/)).
3. Create an [AWS Budget](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cost-management/latest/userguide/budgets-managing-costs.html?icmpid=docs_costmanagement_hp-budgets-overview)
to alert you when your costs exceed a certain threshold.

### AWS CLI

You'll need to set up the AWS CLI and to configure your AWS credentials. If you don't have it installed, you can download it from the [official website](https://aws.amazon.com/cli/).

### Terraform

You'll need Terraform to provision the infrastructure. If you don't have it installed, you can download it from the [official website](https://www.terraform.io/downloads.html).

### Domain Name

You'll need a domain name to host your website. If you don't have one, you can buy one from a domain registrar.
In this article, I'll be using [Route53](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/Route53/latest/DeveloperGuide/domain-register.html?icmpid=docs_console_unmapped) to manage my domain,
because it will simplify the Terraform configuration.

There are ways to connect or migrate an existing domain name, but it's out of scope for this article.

We will be using a domain for the CloudFront distribution, and a TLS certificate.

## Setup

After you've set up your AWS account, AWS CLI and Terraform, you can start provisioning the infrastructure.

I'll be using my Demo Next.js app as an example. You can find the source code on [GitHub](https://github.com/azdanov/aws-terraform-static-website-demo).

### Setting up Terraform

Before we start, it's a good idea to manually create a DynamoDB table for Terraform state locking and an S3 bucket for Terraform remote state storage.

```bash
# Create an S3 bucket for Terraform remote state storage
aws s3api create-bucket --bucket azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-state --region us-east-1

# Disable public access to the S3 bucket
aws s3api put-public-access-block --bucket azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-state --public-access-block-configuration "BlockPublicAcls=true,IgnorePublicAcls=true,BlockPublicPolicy=true,RestrictPublicBuckets=true"

# Create a DynamoDB table for Terraform state locking
aws dynamodb create-table --table-name azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-lock-table --region us-east-1 --attribute-definitions AttributeName=LockID,AttributeType=S --key-schema AttributeName=LockID,KeyType=HASH --provisioned-throughput ReadCapacityUnits=1,WriteCapacityUnits=1
```

### Writing Terraform file

Now, we can start writing the Terraform file. You can easily copy it from the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/azdanov/aws-terraform-static-website-demo/blob/main/infrastructure/main.tf).

```hcl
terraform {
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source  = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "~> 4.63"
    }
  }
  backend "s3" {
    bucket         = "azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-state"
    key            = "terraform.tfstate"
    region         = "us-east-1"
    dynamodb_table = "azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-lock-table"
  }
}

provider "aws" {
  region = "us-east-1"
}

variable "domain_name" {
  type        = string
  description = "The domain name for the website, e.g. example.com. Must already be registered with Route53."
}

locals {
  origin_id = "${var.domain_name}-${sha1(var.domain_name)}"
}

# Route53 zone
data "aws_route53_zone" "zone" {
  name = var.domain_name
}


# S3 bucket
resource "aws_s3_bucket" "bucket" {
  bucket = substr(local.origin_id, 0, 63)

  tags = {
    Name = var.domain_name
  }
}

resource "aws_s3_bucket_public_access_block" "access" {
  bucket = aws_s3_bucket.bucket.id

  block_public_acls       = true
  block_public_policy     = true
  ignore_public_acls      = true
  restrict_public_buckets = true
}


# ACM certificate
resource "aws_acm_certificate" "certificate" {
  domain_name       = var.domain_name
  validation_method = "DNS"

  lifecycle {
    create_before_destroy = true
  }
}

resource "aws_route53_record" "acm_record" {
  for_each = {
    for dvo in aws_acm_certificate.certificate.domain_validation_options : dvo.domain_name => {
      name   = dvo.resource_record_name
      record = dvo.resource_record_value
      type   = dvo.resource_record_type
    }
  }

  allow_overwrite = true
  name            = each.value.name
  records         = [each.value.record]
  ttl             = 60
  type            = each.value.type
  zone_id         = data.aws_route53_zone.zone.zone_id
}

resource "aws_acm_certificate_validation" "validation" {
  certificate_arn         = aws_acm_certificate.certificate.arn
  validation_record_fqdns = [for record in aws_route53_record.acm_record : record.fqdn]
}


# CloudFront distribution
resource "aws_cloudfront_origin_access_control" "oac" {
  name                              = "${var.domain_name} access control"
  description                       = "Cloudfront access control for the ${var.domain_name} distribution."
  origin_access_control_origin_type = "s3"
  signing_behavior                  = "always"
  signing_protocol                  = "sigv4"
}

data "aws_cloudfront_cache_policy" "cache_policy" {
  name = "Managed-CachingOptimized"
}

data "aws_cloudfront_origin_request_policy" "origin_request_policy" {
  name = "Managed-CORS-S3Origin"
}

data "aws_cloudfront_response_headers_policy" "response_headers_policy" {
  name = "Managed-SecurityHeadersPolicy"
}

resource "aws_cloudfront_distribution" "distribution" {
  enabled             = true
  is_ipv6_enabled     = true
  default_root_object = "index.html"
  http_version        = "http2and3"
  price_class         = "PriceClass_100"
  retain_on_delete    = false
  wait_for_deployment = false
  aliases             = [var.domain_name]

  origin {
    domain_name              = aws_s3_bucket.bucket.bucket_regional_domain_name
    origin_access_control_id = aws_cloudfront_origin_access_control.oac.id
    origin_id                = local.origin_id
  }

  custom_error_response {
    error_code         = "403"
    response_code      = "200"
    response_page_path = "/index.html"
  }

  default_cache_behavior {
    compress                   = true
    viewer_protocol_policy     = "redirect-to-https"
    allowed_methods            = ["GET", "HEAD"]
    cached_methods             = ["GET", "HEAD"]
    target_origin_id           = local.origin_id
    cache_policy_id            = data.aws_cloudfront_cache_policy.cache_policy.id
    origin_request_policy_id   = data.aws_cloudfront_origin_request_policy.origin_request_policy.id
    response_headers_policy_id = data.aws_cloudfront_response_headers_policy.response_headers_policy.id
  }

  restrictions {
    geo_restriction {
      restriction_type = "none"
    }
  }

  viewer_certificate {
    cloudfront_default_certificate = false
    acm_certificate_arn            = aws_acm_certificate.certificate.arn
    minimum_protocol_version       = "TLSv1.2_2021"
    ssl_support_method             = "sni-only"
  }
}

resource "aws_route53_record" "cloudfront_record" {
  zone_id = data.aws_route53_zone.zone.zone_id
  name    = var.domain_name
  type    = "A"

  alias {
    evaluate_target_health = false
    name                   = aws_cloudfront_distribution.distribution.domain_name
    zone_id                = aws_cloudfront_distribution.distribution.hosted_zone_id
  }
}

data "aws_iam_policy_document" "document" {
  statement {
    actions   = ["s3:GetObject"]
    resources = ["${aws_s3_bucket.bucket.arn}/*"]

    principals {
      type        = "Service"
      identifiers = ["cloudfront.amazonaws.com"]
    }

    condition {
      test     = "StringEquals"
      variable = "AWS:SourceArn"
      values   = [aws_cloudfront_distribution.distribution.arn]
    }
  }
}

resource "aws_s3_bucket_policy" "policy" {
  bucket = aws_s3_bucket.bucket.id
  policy = data.aws_iam_policy_document.document.json
}
```

### Running Terraform

Now, we can start provisioning the infrastructure.

```bash
# Initialize Terraform
terraform init

# Create a plan
terraform plan

# Apply the plan
terraform apply
```

This will take a few minutes to complete. Once it's done, we can manually upload our static website to the S3 bucket.
You'll need to have the AWS CLI installed and configured and to copy the newly created S3 bucket name and CloudFront distribution ID.

```bash
# Remove the old files from S3 bucket
aws s3 rm s3://<bucket-name> --recursive

# Upload the website to the S3 bucket
aws s3 sync ./<dist-dir> s3://<bucket-name>

# Invalidate the CloudFront cache
aws cloudfront create-invalidation --distribution-id <distribution-id> --paths "/*"
```

This should make our website available at the domain name we specified.

We could've made uploading of website as part of the Terraform script, but it isn't the responsibility of Terraform to manage the content of the bucket.
A better approach would be to use a CI/CD pipeline to automate the process of building and deploying the website, alongside keeping the infrastructure up to date.

## Aside: Using external domain registrar

If you're using a domain registrar other than Route53, you'll need to create a CNAME record pointing to the CloudFront distribution
and a CNAME record for the ACM certificate. For that you'll need to modify the Terraform script and remove the `aws_route53_record` resources.

### Tear down

When we're done with the website, we can tear down the infrastructure by running:

```bash
terraform destroy
```

This will remove all the resources we created. For the S3 buckets and DynamoDB table you will have to do a manual cleanup.

## Conclusion

In this article, we've learned how to deploy a static website to AWS S3 and CloudFront. This process can be simplified by using
[Vercel](https://vercel.com/) or [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/), but their free plans have some limitations,
so it's good to know how to host on your own.

I didn't cover the process of writing the terraform script in detail, but I hope that this article will give you a good starting point for your own projects.
My recommendation is to use the [Terraform AWS docs](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs) to figure out the available options.
Also, manually setting up the infrastructure and then writing the Terraform scripts is a good way to learn how Terraform works and what is required to provision the resources.

If you have any questions or suggestions, feel free to contact me.

Commit message:

add YouTube code review to article

src/pages/articles/aws-terraform-static-website.mdx, after:

import { ArticleLayout } from "@/components/ArticleLayout";

export const meta = {
  author: "Anton Ždanov",
  date: "2023-04-18T07:02:24.190Z",
  title:
    "How to host a static website on AWS S3, CloudFront and Route53 using Terraform",
  description:
    "A recipe on hosting a static website on AWS S3, CloudFront and Route53 using Terraform. Including a GitHub repository source code.",
};

export default (props) => <ArticleLayout meta={meta} {...props} />;

In this article, I'd like to share my experience of hosting a static website on AWS S3, CloudFront and Route53 using Terraform.
It will use a custom domain name, and it will be secured with a TLS certificate.

**Update:**
You can also watch a very useful code review of the terraform project on YouTube by Azure Terraformer.
[Terraform Code Review: File Structure & Naming Conventions](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=taVEy7Rinoo).

## Prerequisites

### AWS Account

You'll need an AWS account to host your website. If you don't have one, you can create one for free.

- [Create an AWS account](https://aws.amazon.com/premiumsupport/knowledge-center/create-and-activate-aws-account/)
- [Getting started: Are you a first-time AWS user?](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/accounts/latest/reference/welcome-first-time-user.html)
- [Getting Started: Follow Security Best Practices as You Configure Your AWS Resources](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/security/getting-started-follow-security-best-practices-as-you-configure-your-aws-resources/)
- [Avoiding unexpected charges](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/awsaccountbilling/latest/aboutv2/checklistforunwantedcharges.html)
- [What is the AWS Free Tier, and how do I use it?](https://repost.aws/knowledge-center/what-is-free-tier)

Just to reiterate, you should follow the best practices when working with AWS:

1. Create a separate [IAM user](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_users_create.html) and don't use the root account.
2. [Enable MFA](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_credentials_mfa_enable.html#id_credentials_mfa_enable-overview) for both the root account and the IAM user (or even better [use SSO](https://aws.amazon.com/iam/identity-center/)).
3. Create an [AWS Budget](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cost-management/latest/userguide/budgets-managing-costs.html?icmpid=docs_costmanagement_hp-budgets-overview)
   to alert you when your costs exceed a certain threshold.

### AWS CLI

You'll need to set up the AWS CLI and to configure your AWS credentials. If you don't have it installed, you can download it from the [official website](https://aws.amazon.com/cli/).

### Terraform

You'll need Terraform to provision the infrastructure. If you don't have it installed, you can download it from the [official website](https://www.terraform.io/downloads.html).

### Domain Name

You'll need a domain name to host your website. If you don't have one, you can buy one from a domain registrar.
In this article, I'll be using [Route53](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/Route53/latest/DeveloperGuide/domain-register.html?icmpid=docs_console_unmapped) to manage my domain,
because it will simplify the Terraform configuration.

There are ways to connect or migrate an existing domain name, but it's out of scope for this article.

We will be using a domain for the CloudFront distribution, and a TLS certificate.

## Setup

After you've set up your AWS account, AWS CLI and Terraform, you can start provisioning the infrastructure.

I'll be using my Demo Next.js app as an example. You can find the source code on [GitHub](https://github.com/azdanov/aws-terraform-static-website-demo).

### Setting up Terraform

Before we start, it's a good idea to manually create a DynamoDB table for Terraform state locking and an S3 bucket for Terraform remote state storage.

```bash
# Create an S3 bucket for Terraform remote state storage
aws s3api create-bucket --bucket azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-state --region us-east-1

# Disable public access to the S3 bucket
aws s3api put-public-access-block --bucket azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-state --public-access-block-configuration "BlockPublicAcls=true,IgnorePublicAcls=true,BlockPublicPolicy=true,RestrictPublicBuckets=true"

# Create a DynamoDB table for Terraform state locking
aws dynamodb create-table --table-name azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-lock-table --region us-east-1 --attribute-definitions AttributeName=LockID,AttributeType=S --key-schema AttributeName=LockID,KeyType=HASH --provisioned-throughput ReadCapacityUnits=1,WriteCapacityUnits=1
```

### Writing Terraform file

Now, we can start writing the Terraform file. You can easily copy it from the [GitHub repository](https://github.com/azdanov/aws-terraform-static-website-demo/blob/main/infrastructure/main.tf).

```hcl
terraform {
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source  = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "~> 4.63"
    }
  }
  backend "s3" {
    bucket         = "azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-state"
    key            = "terraform.tfstate"
    region         = "us-east-1"
    dynamodb_table = "azdanov-aws-static-website-demo-terraform-lock-table"
  }
}

provider "aws" {
  region = "us-east-1"
}

variable "domain_name" {
  type        = string
  description = "The domain name for the website, e.g. example.com. Must already be registered with Route53."
}

locals {
  origin_id = "${var.domain_name}-${sha1(var.domain_name)}"
}

# Route53 zone
data "aws_route53_zone" "zone" {
  name = var.domain_name
}


# S3 bucket
resource "aws_s3_bucket" "bucket" {
  bucket = substr(local.origin_id, 0, 63)

  tags = {
    Name = var.domain_name
  }
}

resource "aws_s3_bucket_public_access_block" "access" {
  bucket = aws_s3_bucket.bucket.id

  block_public_acls       = true
  block_public_policy     = true
  ignore_public_acls      = true
  restrict_public_buckets = true
}


# ACM certificate
resource "aws_acm_certificate" "certificate" {
  domain_name       = var.domain_name
  validation_method = "DNS"

  lifecycle {
    create_before_destroy = true
  }
}

resource "aws_route53_record" "acm_record" {
  for_each = {
    for dvo in aws_acm_certificate.certificate.domain_validation_options : dvo.domain_name => {
      name   = dvo.resource_record_name
      record = dvo.resource_record_value
      type   = dvo.resource_record_type
    }
  }

  allow_overwrite = true
  name            = each.value.name
  records         = [each.value.record]
  ttl             = 60
  type            = each.value.type
  zone_id         = data.aws_route53_zone.zone.zone_id
}

resource "aws_acm_certificate_validation" "validation" {
  certificate_arn         = aws_acm_certificate.certificate.arn
  validation_record_fqdns = [for record in aws_route53_record.acm_record : record.fqdn]
}


# CloudFront distribution
resource "aws_cloudfront_origin_access_control" "oac" {
  name                              = "${var.domain_name} access control"
  description                       = "Cloudfront access control for the ${var.domain_name} distribution."
  origin_access_control_origin_type = "s3"
  signing_behavior                  = "always"
  signing_protocol                  = "sigv4"
}

data "aws_cloudfront_cache_policy" "cache_policy" {
  name = "Managed-CachingOptimized"
}

data "aws_cloudfront_origin_request_policy" "origin_request_policy" {
  name = "Managed-CORS-S3Origin"
}

data "aws_cloudfront_response_headers_policy" "response_headers_policy" {
  name = "Managed-SecurityHeadersPolicy"
}

resource "aws_cloudfront_distribution" "distribution" {
  enabled             = true
  is_ipv6_enabled     = true
  default_root_object = "index.html"
  http_version        = "http2and3"
  price_class         = "PriceClass_100"
  retain_on_delete    = false
  wait_for_deployment = false
  aliases             = [var.domain_name]

  origin {
    domain_name              = aws_s3_bucket.bucket.bucket_regional_domain_name
    origin_access_control_id = aws_cloudfront_origin_access_control.oac.id
    origin_id                = local.origin_id
  }

  custom_error_response {
    error_code         = "403"
    response_code      = "200"
    response_page_path = "/index.html"
  }

  default_cache_behavior {
    compress                   = true
    viewer_protocol_policy     = "redirect-to-https"
    allowed_methods            = ["GET", "HEAD"]
    cached_methods             = ["GET", "HEAD"]
    target_origin_id           = local.origin_id
    cache_policy_id            = data.aws_cloudfront_cache_policy.cache_policy.id
    origin_request_policy_id   = data.aws_cloudfront_origin_request_policy.origin_request_policy.id
    response_headers_policy_id = data.aws_cloudfront_response_headers_policy.response_headers_policy.id
  }

  restrictions {
    geo_restriction {
      restriction_type = "none"
    }
  }

  viewer_certificate {
    cloudfront_default_certificate = false
    acm_certificate_arn            = aws_acm_certificate.certificate.arn
    minimum_protocol_version       = "TLSv1.2_2021"
    ssl_support_method             = "sni-only"
  }
}

resource "aws_route53_record" "cloudfront_record" {
  zone_id = data.aws_route53_zone.zone.zone_id
  name    = var.domain_name
  type    = "A"

  alias {
    evaluate_target_health = false
    name                   = aws_cloudfront_distribution.distribution.domain_name
    zone_id                = aws_cloudfront_distribution.distribution.hosted_zone_id
  }
}

data "aws_iam_policy_document" "document" {
  statement {
    actions   = ["s3:GetObject"]
    resources = ["${aws_s3_bucket.bucket.arn}/*"]

    principals {
      type        = "Service"
      identifiers = ["cloudfront.amazonaws.com"]
    }

    condition {
      test     = "StringEquals"
      variable = "AWS:SourceArn"
      values   = [aws_cloudfront_distribution.distribution.arn]
    }
  }
}

resource "aws_s3_bucket_policy" "policy" {
  bucket = aws_s3_bucket.bucket.id
  policy = data.aws_iam_policy_document.document.json
}
```

### Running Terraform

Now, we can start provisioning the infrastructure.

```bash
# Initialize Terraform
terraform init

# Create a plan
terraform plan

# Apply the plan
terraform apply
```

This will take a few minutes to complete. Once it's done, we can manually upload our static website to the S3 bucket.
You'll need to have the AWS CLI installed and configured and to copy the newly created S3 bucket name and CloudFront distribution ID.

```bash
# Remove the old files from S3 bucket
aws s3 rm s3://<bucket-name> --recursive

# Upload the website to the S3 bucket
aws s3 sync ./<dist-dir> s3://<bucket-name>

# Invalidate the CloudFront cache
aws cloudfront create-invalidation --distribution-id <distribution-id> --paths "/*"
```

This should make our website available at the domain name we specified.

We could've made uploading of website as part of the Terraform script, but it isn't the responsibility of Terraform to manage the content of the bucket.
A better approach would be to use a CI/CD pipeline to automate the process of building and deploying the website, alongside keeping the infrastructure up to date.

## Aside: Using external domain registrar

If you're using a domain registrar other than Route53, you'll need to create a CNAME record pointing to the CloudFront distribution
and a CNAME record for the ACM certificate. For that you'll need to modify the Terraform script and remove the `aws_route53_record` resources.

### Tear down

When we're done with the website, we can tear down the infrastructure by running:

```bash
terraform destroy
```

This will remove all the resources we created. For the S3 buckets and DynamoDB table you will have to do a manual cleanup.

## Conclusion

In this article, we've learned how to deploy a static website to AWS S3 and CloudFront. This process can be simplified by using
[Vercel](https://vercel.com/) or [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/), but their free plans have some limitations,
so it's good to know how to host on your own.

I didn't cover the process of writing the terraform script in detail, but I hope that this article will give you a good starting point for your own projects.
My recommendation is to use the [Terraform AWS docs](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs) to figure out the available options.
Also, manually setting up the infrastructure and then writing the Terraform scripts is a good way to learn how Terraform works and what is required to provision the resources.

If you have any questions or suggestions, feel free to contact me.
