src/app/articles/2025/rust-error-guidelines/page.mdx, before:

import { ArticleLayout } from "../../../../components/ArticleLayout";

export const article = {
  author: "Anton Ždanov",
  date: "2025-10-31T12:34:39.977Z",
  title: "Rust Error Guidelines",
  description:
    "Personal notes on Rust error guidelines, handling, and tips for library and application errors.",
};

export const metadata = {
  title: article.title,
  description: article.description,
};

export default function MDXPage({ children }) {
  return <ArticleLayout article={article}>{children}</ArticleLayout>;
}

> Personal notes on Rust error guidelines, handling, and tips for library and application errors.

## Recommendations for Creating Error Types

### 1. Use an `enum` for Your Error Type

Define errors as [`enum`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/enumerations.html) to represent multiple distinct error conditions:

```rust
pub enum MyError {
    IoError(std::io::Error),
    ParseError(String),
    ValidationError { field: String, reason: String },
}
```

**Why?** Enums provide type-safe error handling and enable exhaustive pattern matching.

### 2. Group Related Error Conditions

Organize error variants logically within as few enums as necessary:

```rust
pub enum DatabaseError {
    ConnectionFailed(String),
    QueryFailed { query: String, cause: String },
    RecordNotFound { id: u64 },
    Timeout,
}
```

**Why?** This improves maintainability and keeps error types focused on a single domain.

### 3. Encapsulate Third-Party Errors

Don't expose error types from external dependencies directly:

```rust
// Bad: Exposes implementation details
pub fn read_config() -> Result<Config, std::io::Error> { }

// Good: Wraps external error
pub fn read_config() -> Result<Config, ConfigError> { }

pub enum ConfigError {
    Io(std::io::Error),
    Parse(serde_json::Error),
}
```

**Why?** This decouples your API from implementation details and allows error type evolution.

### 4. Make Your Enum Non-Exhaustive

Use [`#[non_exhaustive]`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes/type_system.html#r-attributes.type-system.non_exhaustive) to allow adding variants without breaking changes:

```rust
#[non_exhaustive]
pub enum ApiError {
    Unauthorized,
    NotFound,
    ServerError,
}
```

**Why?** This maintains backward compatibility when adding new error variants in future releases.

### 5. Implement Required Traits

#### 5a. Manual Implementation

Will require implementing [`std::fmt::Display`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/fmt/trait.Display.html) and [`std::error::Error`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/fmt/struct.Error.html):

```rust
use std::fmt;
use std::error::Error;

impl fmt::Display for MyError {
    fn fmt(&self, f: &mut fmt::Formatter) -> fmt::Result {
        match self {
            MyError::IoError(e) => write!(f, "IO error: {}", e),
            MyError::ParseError(msg) => write!(f, "Parse error: {}", msg),
        }
    }
}

// Implementing source will enable error chaining
// https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/error/trait.Error.html#method.source
impl Error for MyError {
    fn source(&self) -> Option<&(dyn Error + 'static)> {
        match self {
            MyError::IoError(e) => Some(e),
            _ => None,
        }
    }
}
```

#### 5b. Using `thiserror` (Recommended)

An alternative is to use the [`thiserror`](https://crates.io/crates/thiserror) package to reduce boilerplate:

```rust
use thiserror::Error;

#[derive(Error, Debug)]
#[non_exhaustive]
pub enum MyError {
    #[error("IO error: {0}")]
    IoError(#[from] std::io::Error),

    #[error("Parse error: {0}")]
    ParseError(String),

    #[error("Validation failed for field '{field}': {reason}")]
    ValidationError { field: String, reason: String },
}
```

**Why?** The `Error` trait enables compatibility with `?` operator and error handling libraries. `thiserror` reduces boilerplate significantly.

---

## Additional Tips

### Use `Result` Type Aliases

Create type aliases using [`Result`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/) for cleaner and more consistent function signatures:

```rust
pub type Result<T> = std::result::Result<T, UserServiceError>;

pub fn get_user(id: u64) -> Result<User> {
    // ...
}
```

**Why?** This reduces repetition and makes refactoring easier if you need to change the error type.

### Implement `From` Trait for Error Conversion

The [`From`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.From.html) trait helps with automatic error conversion:

```rust
// Manual implementation
impl From<std::io::Error> for MyError {
    fn from(error: std::io::Error) -> Self {
        MyError::Io(error)
    }
}

impl From<serde_json::Error> for MyError {
    fn from(error: serde_json::Error) -> Self {
        MyError::Parse(error.to_string())
    }
}

// Or use thiserror's #[from] attribute
#[derive(Error, Debug)]
pub enum MyError {
    #[error("IO error: {0}")]
    Io(#[from] std::io::Error),

    #[error("Parse error: {0}")]
    Parse(#[from] serde_json::Error),
}

// Now you can use ? operator with automatic conversion
fn read_and_parse() -> Result<Config, MyError> {
    let content = std::fs::read_to_string("config.json")?; // auto-converts io::Error
    let config = serde_json::from_str(&content)?; // auto-converts serde_json::Error
    Ok(config)
}
```

**Why?** Automatic conversion eliminates manual `map_err()` calls and makes error propagation seamless.

### Add Context with Error Chaining

```rust
fn load_config(path: &str) -> Result<Config, ConfigError> {
    let content = std::fs::read_to_string(path)
        .map_err(|source| ConfigError::ReadFailed {
            path: path.to_string(),
            source,
        })?;

    let config = serde_json::from_str(&content)
        .map_err(|source| ConfigError::ParseFailed {
            path: path.to_string(),
            source,
        })?;

    Ok(config)
}
```

**Why?** Context-rich errors make debugging significantly easier by preserving the error chain.

### Consider Error Codes for APIs

```rust
#[derive(Error, Debug)]
#[non_exhaustive]
pub enum ApiError {
    #[error("[AUTH001] Unauthorized: {0}")]
    Unauthorized(String),

    #[error("[RES404] Resource not found: {resource_type} with id {id}")]
    NotFound { resource_type: String, id: String },
}

impl ApiError {
    pub fn error_code(&self) -> &str {
        match self {
            ApiError::Unauthorized(_) => "AUTH001",
            ApiError::NotFound { .. } => "RES404",
        }
    }
}
```

**Why?** Error codes enable clients to handle errors programmatically and support internationalization.

### Document Error Conditions

```rust
/// Fetches a user by their ID from the database.
///
/// # Errors
///
/// This function will return an error if:
/// - [`UserServiceError::Database`] - Database connection or query fails
/// - [`UserServiceError::UserNotFound`] - No user exists with the given ID
/// - [`UserServiceError::PermissionDenied`] - Caller lacks read permissions
pub fn get_user(id: u64) -> Result<User, UserServiceError> {
    // ...
}
```

**Why?** Documentation helps users understand and handle errors correctly without reading the source code.

### Use `#[must_use]` for Result Types

When necessary use [`#[must_use]`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes/diagnostics.html#the-must_use-attribute) to enforce handling of results:

```rust
#[must_use = "this function returns a Result that should be handled"]
pub fn save_user(user: &User) -> Result<()> {
    // ...
}
```

**Why?** This prevents accidentally ignoring errors, which is a common source of bugs.

### Create Helper Methods for Common Patterns

```rust
use thiserror::Error;

#[derive(Error, Debug)]
#[non_exhaustive]
pub enum ValidationError {
    #[error("Field '{field}' is required")]
    Required { field: String },

    #[error("Field '{field}' has invalid format: {reason}")]
    InvalidFormat { field: String, reason: String },
}

// Helper methods
impl ValidationError {
    pub fn required(field: impl Into<String>) -> Self {
        Self::Required { field: field.into() }
    }

    pub fn invalid_format(field: impl Into<String>, reason: impl Into<String>) -> Self {
        Self::InvalidFormat {
            field: field.into(),
            reason: reason.into(),
        }
    }
}

// Usage
fn validate_email(email: &str) -> Result<(), ValidationError> {
    if email.is_empty() {
        return Err(ValidationError::required("email"));
    }
    if !email.contains('@') {
        return Err(ValidationError::invalid_format("email", "missing @ symbol"));
    }
    Ok(())
}
```

**Why?** Helper methods reduce boilerplate and ensure consistent error construction.

### Separate Recoverable from Unrecoverable Errors

Use `Result` for recoverable errors and [`panic!`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/macro.panic.html) for unrecoverable ones:

```rust
// Recoverable: User might fix the input
pub fn parse_age(input: &str) -> Result<u32, ParseError> {
    input.parse().map_err(|_| ParseError::InvalidAge(input.to_string()))
}

// Unrecoverable: Programming error
pub fn get_config_value(key: &str) -> String {
    CONFIG.get(key)
        .unwrap_or_else(|| panic!("Config key '{}' must be set", key))
}
```

**Why?** This distinction clarifies error handling strategies and improves code readability.

---

## Additional Libraries and Tools

### Use `anyhow` for Application-Level Error Handling

For applications (not libraries), consider using [`anyhow`](https://crates.io/crates/anyhow):

```rust
use anyhow::{Context, Result};

fn load_config(path: &str) -> Result<Config> {
    let content = std::fs::read_to_string(path)
        .context(format!("Failed to read config from '{}'", path))?;

    let config: Config = serde_json::from_str(&content)
        .context(format!("Failed to parse config from '{}'", path))?;

    Ok(config)
}
```

**Why?** `anyhow` simplifies error handling by providing a generic error type that can wrap any error, along with context.

### Enhanced Error Reporting with `miette`

For applications that need rich diagnostic error reporting try [`miette`](https://crates.io/crates/miette):

```rust
use miette::{Diagnostic, Result};
use thiserror::Error;

#[derive(Error, Debug, Diagnostic)]
#[error("Configuration validation failed")]
#[diagnostic(
    code(config::validation_failed),
    help("Check your configuration file syntax and required fields")
)]
pub struct ConfigValidationError {
    #[source_code]
    src: String,

    #[label("This field is invalid")]
    invalid_field: miette::SourceSpan,
}

fn validate_config(config_content: &str) -> Result<Config> {
    // ... validation logic
    Err(ConfigValidationError {
        src: config_content.to_string(),
        invalid_field: (42, 10).into(), // byte offset and length
    })?
}
```

**Why?** `miette` provides beautiful, IDE-like error reports with source code snippets, suggestions, and structured diagnostic information. Useful for CLI tools and developer-facing applications.

### Error Tracing Integration

Integrate errors with structured logging using [`tracing-error`](https://crates.io/crates/tracing-error):

```rust
use tracing_error::ErrorLayer;
use tracing_subscriber::{layer::SubscriberExt, util::SubscriberInitExt};

fn main() -> Result<()> {
    tracing_subscriber::registry()
        .with(ErrorLayer::default())
        .with(tracing_subscriber::fmt::layer())
        .init();

    // Your application code
    Ok(())
}

// In your error handling code
match operation() {
    Ok(result) => result,
    Err(e) => {
        tracing::error!(
            error = ?e,
            operation = "daily_backup",
            "Operation failed"
        );
        return Err(e.into());
    }
}
```

**Why?** This allows capturing rich context about errors in logs, facilitating debugging and monitoring in production environments.

Commit message:

add tldr section to rust errors

src/app/articles/2025/rust-error-guidelines/page.mdx, after:

import { ArticleLayout } from "../../../../components/ArticleLayout";

export const article = {
  author: "Anton Ždanov",
  date: "2025-10-31T12:34:39.977Z",
  title: "Rust Error Guidelines",
  description:
    "Personal notes on Rust error guidelines, handling, and tips for library and application errors.",
};

export const metadata = {
  title: article.title,
  description: article.description,
};

export default function MDXPage({ children }) {
  return <ArticleLayout article={article}>{children}</ArticleLayout>;
}

> Personal notes on Rust error guidelines, handling, and tips for library and application errors.

## TL;DR

**Core Principles:**

- Use `enum` types with `#[non_exhaustive]` for error definitions
- Wrap third-party errors—never expose them directly in your public API
- Implement `Display` and `Error` traits (or use `thiserror` to reduce boilerplate)
- Create `Result<T>` type aliases for cleaner function signatures

**Key Decisions:**

- **Libraries:** Use `thiserror` for custom error types with minimal boilerplate
- **Applications:** Use `anyhow` for flexible error handling with context
- **CLI Tools:** Consider `miette` or `eyre` for rich, user-friendly error diagnostics
- **Recoverable vs Unrecoverable:** Use `Result` for recoverable errors, `panic!` for programming errors

**Essential Patterns:**

- Implement `From` trait for automatic error conversion with `?` operator
- Add context to errors using `map_err()` or `.context()` (with `anyhow`)
- Document error conditions in function docs with `# Errors` section
- Use helper methods for common error construction patterns

## Recommendations for Creating Error Types

### 1. Use an `enum` for Your Error Type

Define errors as [`enum`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/items/enumerations.html) to represent multiple distinct error conditions:

```rust
pub enum MyError {
    IoError(std::io::Error),
    ParseError(String),
    ValidationError { field: String, reason: String },
}
```

**Why?** Enums provide type-safe error handling and enable exhaustive pattern matching.

### 2. Group Related Error Conditions

Organize error variants logically within as few enums as necessary:

```rust
pub enum DatabaseError {
    ConnectionFailed(String),
    QueryFailed { query: String, cause: String },
    RecordNotFound { id: u64 },
    Timeout,
}
```

**Why?** This improves maintainability and keeps error types focused on a single domain.

### 3. Encapsulate Third-Party Errors

Don't expose error types from external dependencies directly:

```rust
// Bad: Exposes implementation details
pub fn read_config() -> Result<Config, std::io::Error> { }

// Good: Wraps external error
pub fn read_config() -> Result<Config, ConfigError> { }

pub enum ConfigError {
    Io(std::io::Error),
    Parse(serde_json::Error),
}
```

**Why?** This decouples your API from implementation details and allows error type evolution.

### 4. Make Your Enum Non-Exhaustive

Use [`#[non_exhaustive]`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes/type_system.html#r-attributes.type-system.non_exhaustive) to allow adding variants without breaking changes:

```rust
#[non_exhaustive]
pub enum ApiError {
    Unauthorized,
    NotFound,
    ServerError,
}
```

**Why?** This maintains backward compatibility when adding new error variants in future releases.

### 5. Implement Required Traits

#### 5a. Manual Implementation

Will require implementing [`std::fmt::Display`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/fmt/trait.Display.html) and [`std::error::Error`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/fmt/struct.Error.html):

```rust
use std::fmt;
use std::error::Error;

impl fmt::Display for MyError {
    fn fmt(&self, f: &mut fmt::Formatter) -> fmt::Result {
        match self {
            MyError::IoError(e) => write!(f, "IO error: {}", e),
            MyError::ParseError(msg) => write!(f, "Parse error: {}", msg),
        }
    }
}

// Implementing source will enable error chaining
// https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/error/trait.Error.html#method.source
impl Error for MyError {
    fn source(&self) -> Option<&(dyn Error + 'static)> {
        match self {
            MyError::IoError(e) => Some(e),
            _ => None,
        }
    }
}
```

#### 5b. Using `thiserror` (Recommended)

An alternative is to use the [`thiserror`](https://crates.io/crates/thiserror) package to reduce boilerplate:

```rust
use thiserror::Error;

#[derive(Error, Debug)]
#[non_exhaustive]
pub enum MyError {
    #[error("IO error: {0}")]
    IoError(#[from] std::io::Error),

    #[error("Parse error: {0}")]
    ParseError(String),

    #[error("Validation failed for field '{field}': {reason}")]
    ValidationError { field: String, reason: String },
}
```

**Why?** The `Error` trait enables compatibility with `?` operator and error handling libraries. `thiserror` reduces boilerplate significantly.

---

## Additional Tips

### Use `Result` Type Aliases

Create type aliases using [`Result`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/result/) for cleaner and more consistent function signatures:

```rust
pub type Result<T> = std::result::Result<T, UserServiceError>;

pub fn get_user(id: u64) -> Result<User> {
    // ...
}
```

**Why?** This reduces repetition and makes refactoring easier if you need to change the error type.

### Implement `From` Trait for Error Conversion

The [`From`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/convert/trait.From.html) trait helps with automatic error conversion:

```rust
// Manual implementation
impl From<std::io::Error> for MyError {
    fn from(error: std::io::Error) -> Self {
        MyError::Io(error)
    }
}

impl From<serde_json::Error> for MyError {
    fn from(error: serde_json::Error) -> Self {
        MyError::Parse(error.to_string())
    }
}

// Or use thiserror's #[from] attribute
#[derive(Error, Debug)]
pub enum MyError {
    #[error("IO error: {0}")]
    Io(#[from] std::io::Error),

    #[error("Parse error: {0}")]
    Parse(#[from] serde_json::Error),
}

// Now you can use ? operator with automatic conversion
fn read_and_parse() -> Result<Config, MyError> {
    let content = std::fs::read_to_string("config.json")?; // auto-converts io::Error
    let config = serde_json::from_str(&content)?; // auto-converts serde_json::Error
    Ok(config)
}
```

**Why?** Automatic conversion eliminates manual `map_err()` calls and makes error propagation seamless.

### Add Context with Error Chaining

```rust
fn load_config(path: &str) -> Result<Config, ConfigError> {
    let content = std::fs::read_to_string(path)
        .map_err(|source| ConfigError::ReadFailed {
            path: path.to_string(),
            source,
        })?;

    let config = serde_json::from_str(&content)
        .map_err(|source| ConfigError::ParseFailed {
            path: path.to_string(),
            source,
        })?;

    Ok(config)
}
```

**Why?** Context-rich errors make debugging significantly easier by preserving the error chain.

### Consider Error Codes for APIs

```rust
#[derive(Error, Debug)]
#[non_exhaustive]
pub enum ApiError {
    #[error("[AUTH001] Unauthorized: {0}")]
    Unauthorized(String),

    #[error("[RES404] Resource not found: {resource_type} with id {id}")]
    NotFound { resource_type: String, id: String },
}

impl ApiError {
    pub fn error_code(&self) -> &str {
        match self {
            ApiError::Unauthorized(_) => "AUTH001",
            ApiError::NotFound { .. } => "RES404",
        }
    }
}
```

**Why?** Error codes enable clients to handle errors programmatically and support internationalization.

### Document Error Conditions

```rust
/// Fetches a user by their ID from the database.
///
/// # Errors
///
/// This function will return an error if:
/// - [`UserServiceError::Database`] - Database connection or query fails
/// - [`UserServiceError::UserNotFound`] - No user exists with the given ID
/// - [`UserServiceError::PermissionDenied`] - Caller lacks read permissions
pub fn get_user(id: u64) -> Result<User, UserServiceError> {
    // ...
}
```

**Why?** Documentation helps users understand and handle errors correctly without reading the source code.

### Use `#[must_use]` for Result Types

When necessary use [`#[must_use]`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/reference/attributes/diagnostics.html#the-must_use-attribute) to enforce handling of results:

```rust
#[must_use = "this function returns a Result that should be handled"]
pub fn save_user(user: &User) -> Result<()> {
    // ...
}
```

**Why?** This prevents accidentally ignoring errors, which is a common source of bugs.

### Create Helper Methods for Common Patterns

```rust
use thiserror::Error;

#[derive(Error, Debug)]
#[non_exhaustive]
pub enum ValidationError {
    #[error("Field '{field}' is required")]
    Required { field: String },

    #[error("Field '{field}' has invalid format: {reason}")]
    InvalidFormat { field: String, reason: String },
}

// Helper methods
impl ValidationError {
    pub fn required(field: impl Into<String>) -> Self {
        Self::Required { field: field.into() }
    }

    pub fn invalid_format(field: impl Into<String>, reason: impl Into<String>) -> Self {
        Self::InvalidFormat {
            field: field.into(),
            reason: reason.into(),
        }
    }
}

// Usage
fn validate_email(email: &str) -> Result<(), ValidationError> {
    if email.is_empty() {
        return Err(ValidationError::required("email"));
    }
    if !email.contains('@') {
        return Err(ValidationError::invalid_format("email", "missing @ symbol"));
    }
    Ok(())
}
```

**Why?** Helper methods reduce boilerplate and ensure consistent error construction.

### Separate Recoverable from Unrecoverable Errors

Use `Result` for recoverable errors and [`panic!`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/macro.panic.html) for unrecoverable ones:

```rust
// Recoverable: User might fix the input
pub fn parse_age(input: &str) -> Result<u32, ParseError> {
    input.parse().map_err(|_| ParseError::InvalidAge(input.to_string()))
}

// Unrecoverable: Programming error
pub fn get_config_value(key: &str) -> String {
    CONFIG.get(key)
        .unwrap_or_else(|| panic!("Config key '{}' must be set", key))
}
```

**Why?** This distinction clarifies error handling strategies and improves code readability.

---

## Additional Libraries and Tools

### Use `anyhow` for Application-Level Error Handling

For applications (not libraries), consider using [`anyhow`](https://crates.io/crates/anyhow):

```rust
use anyhow::{Context, Result};

fn load_config(path: &str) -> Result<Config> {
    let content = std::fs::read_to_string(path)
        .context(format!("Failed to read config from '{}'", path))?;

    let config: Config = serde_json::from_str(&content)
        .context(format!("Failed to parse config from '{}'", path))?;

    Ok(config)
}
```

**Why?** `anyhow` simplifies error handling by providing a generic error type that can wrap any error, along with context.

### Enhanced Error Reporting with `miette`

For applications that need rich diagnostic error reporting try [`miette`](https://crates.io/crates/miette):

```rust
use miette::{Diagnostic, Result};
use thiserror::Error;

#[derive(Error, Debug, Diagnostic)]
#[error("Configuration validation failed")]
#[diagnostic(
    code(config::validation_failed),
    help("Check your configuration file syntax and required fields")
)]
pub struct ConfigValidationError {
    #[source_code]
    src: String,

    #[label("This field is invalid")]
    invalid_field: miette::SourceSpan,
}

fn validate_config(config_content: &str) -> Result<Config> {
    // ... validation logic
    Err(ConfigValidationError {
        src: config_content.to_string(),
        invalid_field: (42, 10).into(), // byte offset and length
    })?
}
```

**Why?** `miette` provides beautiful, IDE-like error reports with source code snippets, suggestions, and structured diagnostic information. Useful for CLI tools and developer-facing applications.

### Error Tracing Integration

Integrate errors with structured logging using [`tracing-error`](https://crates.io/crates/tracing-error):

```rust
use tracing_error::ErrorLayer;
use tracing_subscriber::{layer::SubscriberExt, util::SubscriberInitExt};

fn main() -> Result<()> {
    tracing_subscriber::registry()
        .with(ErrorLayer::default())
        .with(tracing_subscriber::fmt::layer())
        .init();

    // Your application code
    Ok(())
}

// In your error handling code
match operation() {
    Ok(result) => result,
    Err(e) => {
        tracing::error!(
            error = ?e,
            operation = "daily_backup",
            "Operation failed"
        );
        return Err(e.into());
    }
}
```

**Why?** This allows capturing rich context about errors in logs, facilitating debugging and monitoring in production environments.
